In the previous video we installed
Python 3.6 onto this computer. Now it's
time to have a quick look at idle.
Now when developing software in any
programming language, integrated
development environment or IDE makes
life a lot easier for developers, so that
allows you to enter compile and run your
programs from within that program
without having to leave that program or
editor to actually run and execute your
program so you can avoid using the
command line for a lot of programming.
Now Python provides a very simple IDE
called idle which we installed with
Python in the previous video.
Now the name idle is a homage to Eric
Idle one of the members of the comedy
group Monty Python, the idle interfaces
directly with the Python interpreter.
Now for a number of reasons, that will become
apparent as we progress through the
course, we just using IntelliJ IDEA or
pycharm instead of idle and in fact in
the next video, we're going to show you
how to go about installing it but if you
prefer to stick with idle for any reason
or if you have to access idle we just
really want to find out a little bit
about it, it can sometimes be very useful.
So in this video I'm going to show you how
to use the basics of idle. Now we're
going to assume that you installed it as
shown in the last video, so we're going
to start in this case because we're on
Windows, we want to start idle from the
Windows Start menu, I'm going to come
down here and I'm going to type in idle.
So you may need to navigate to the
programs file and select data which will
be in the Python area that where Python
was installed but in my case you saw it
pop up there automatically, so idle is
what we want python 3.16 and press enter
and that it'll loads up this is we share
which was going to put in the middle of
the screen, what I'm going to do is
size that up so it's a little bit easier
to see and you can check that it's the
right version by checking the message
that appears, you can see here python
three point six point two and that of
course was the version of python that we
installed in the previous video.
Alright so once idle is running anything
you type will be passed to the Python
interpreter and the results displayed on
the screen. Now ordinarily in a program,
you need to use the print statement to
display result and you'll learn a lot
more about that in later videos but you
don't actually need to do that in the
idle shell and to demonstrate that I'm
going to type two plus four
two plus four press enter and you can see
I immediately got the answer six showing
on the screen there, so what happened
here was I typed that code in
the expression two plus four was passed on
to Python and Python evaluated that
and come back with the answer in this
case six. Well so what we're going to do
is just type in some code here.
Now don't worry too much about exactly
what this code means, you don't need to
understand it at this stage of the
course. The purpose of this video is just
to show you how idle works, in later
videos you're going to learn in detail
the syntax of Python.
So basically we're demonstrating Python
not explaining the Python language at
this stage. Now in the course examples
you'll often have to enter code blocks
which would blocks of code spanning
several lines. Now idle knows when
you're typing such a block and won't
immediately execute anything until
you've finished the block, you'll know
it's expecting more text because the
chevrons the three greater than signs
which you'll see shortly well they won't
reappear until you've finished but let's
actually type in the code and you'll see
what I mean here.
So I'm going to start typing for space i
in range noting the spaces I'm putting
there and I'm typing everything in lower
case and they want a set of parentheses
then within the parentheses I want to
type a number 10 and then at the end of
that I want to type a colon.
Now the colon at the end of the
first line is very important and so is
the indentation of the second line which
you'll see when I press enter here,
and press enter.
And again notice as I mentioned I think
something's changed there in the past
when I typed in two plus four I got nine
for six but here we haven't seen those
little chevron's 3 greater than some
ones appear and that's because pythons
expecting something else. Now notice
how it indented automatically for us,
so we're going to type in now print
parentheses i, I didn't do anything else
and I'm going to press enter one more
time. So we've now finished our simple
little program, I'm going to press
backspace to delete the indent. Now this
tells all that we've finished the block
and want to go ahead and press enter now
it's going to execute the code and you
can see that we've got the results of
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9.
Now again don't worry too
much about understanding the code,
you don't need to understand the code at
this stage, the point is you can see that
idle has some basic capabilities to run
Python code. Now this is all very useful
for checking simple instructions but
editing what you've typed isn't very
intuitive. So let's just say we wanted to
change the number 10 that you can see up
here, we wanted to change that to the
number 11. What we can do is move the
cursor up to the previous line and press enter
and idle will bring a copy of it down
again running for modification and
execution. So I'm going to move my cursor
and go up to that line we're going to
press enter and you can see it
automatically copied that code down to
the bottom and then I can move the
cursor up one more lines change that to 11.
I can delete out the zero and make it
a 1, move the cursor down to the print
line press enter and press backspace and
then press enter,
this time I'll execute it and you can see
that we've got one additional number
showing down the bottom. All right so
that's one way of executing code and it
can be useful we just want to check out
a bit of code and see if it works.
Now you often want to save programs
in a separate file and run them from
there. So what we're going to do now
let's go to the file menu click on
choose new file and you can see when we
do that I get a little editor here
little simple little text editor we're
going to type in a program here and then
we going to try running it, let me type
in print and parentheses in double quotes
hello world, so I can run that I can
either come over here and select the run
menu and run it that way, alternately I
can press f5 which will do the same
thing. So press f5 it comes up and says
here that do you want to save the
program before we run it? So let's go
ahead and do that we'll click on save
we're going to save it on my desktop
we'll call it hello world press enter
and you can see what happened was after
I saved it, it went back to the other
Python shell window and executed the
code and it now gives us the name of the
file that you used when the Python file
was running. Now again would recommend that
you use IntelliJ idea instead
that's because idles fairly basic,
it doesn't really provide any hints, code checking
or all the other features of a full only
like IntelliJ does, if you want to stick
with idle though for some reason this
brief introduction we'll have got to
started. Now in installing IntelliJ IDEA
when configuring will be covered in the
next video, so here's a few reasons why
you should consider using it rather than
idle firstly IntelliJ IDEA has got code
checking as you type, so IntelliJ
checks your code as you type it in and
flags errors with a marker in the right
margin and it also suggests improvements
in both of style of your code and the
content and this is incredibly useful
especially when starting out with a new language.
Now auto-completion works across the
various Python libraries to provide
rapid selection of the methods and
functions and hints on the syntax
whereas autoloading copes with core
functionality it's called auto indenting
and also allows editing of XML and text
files, so that the same tool can be used
to examine data for excellent
refactoring tools it's got a Python
debugger, it's got support for DJango and
also Google App Engine projects and the
other is core thing is it also supports many
languages in addition to Python Java
scala, perl, groovy and many frameworks.
so important is you really only need to
learn one IDE for all development and
also keep in mind that Google's Android
studio for Android development,
well that's basically IntelliJ IDEA under the
hood. Now although we're going to be
using IntelliJ IDEA in this course,
you can use your favorite IDE instead if
you prefer so if you're using something
like eclipse or pycharm or one of the
many other python IDEs then by all
means go ahead and carry on using them.
What I want to do now is finish by
running a short program that we've
created just to demonstrate some of the
power on the Python language, now this
program is going to collect exchange
rate data from the internet then produce
a graph showing three currencies for the
last 12 months. Now this complete program
is less than 100 lines of code and I
think that's pretty impressive.
Now generally what we strongly recommend
is that you type in the code while
watching the videos in this course,
I really cannot stress that enough
typing in code rather than just
watching me type it really does help you
learn faster and consolidate your learning to make
to help you understand
what you're doing. So that really is
important and without going into a lot
of Education of theory, you retain about
80% of the things you do compared to
that 30% of things that you see. Now if that
doesn't persuade you, I'll add what we
learned by typing in code, we didn't
have the internet back then so back when
myself and Jean Paul were starting out
as programmers, we didn't actually have
the internet back then so we actually
copied the code from magazines and books
there the act of typing it in makes you
focus on each word that you're typing
and correcting the typing errors
afterwards really does help you to learn
what's going on. And I'd also recommend
that you watch each video again after
you've typed the code, so you can focus
on the explanation of what it's doing
but with that said this next bits an
exception to that and that's because
this code that I'm about to show you is
quite comple, so we've produced is
program to show you the power of Python
and there's a lot of things in the code
that just won't make sense to you at the
moment at this point in the course.
And that's because this program that I'm
going to show you uses functions
generated as external modules and things
like lists and tuples and probably all
of that doesn't make sense but by the
time you finish this course, you'll
understand what all those things are and
more importantly how to use them in your
own programs, in fact you'll actually
understand a lot more than that, for now
though relax so let's just run this
program to get a feel for what you can
do with Python. So what we've done is
we've made this program that we're going
to be using freely available for
download on the internet because it's
such a small program, so you need to open
a browser let's go ahead and do that,
you need to go to the website learn
programming academy as a learning
programming dor academy forward slash and then
we want to type in py download dot html and
you can see the link there on the screen
and press enter, it give you a simple
little file pop-up and it's got an
option here right click and save this
file to your computer.
So what we've done is we put this Python
code on our website and we're now going
to download that, so I'm going to come
over here to this link I'm going to
right click that link, click on save
target s and it's going to save this
onto my desktop, so I'm just going to
click on desktop, you can see the name of
the file in exchange underscore score chart
and you can also notice it says save as
type python file, so I will click on save
and it was a very small file you can see
that it's already finished down the
bottom I'm going to close down the
browser now and I'm back at idle now,
so from the file menu what we can do now is
click on file select open you want to go
to our desktop and we want to click on
exchange chart you can also see the
other hollow world program that we
created earlier in this videos and now
we're going to select open. Now you can
see that's the code that has been
downloaded and that we've now opened in
idle and if you're not familiar with
Python, I'm sure that probably looks very
complicated but as I said you're going
to understand all of this and what it's
doing is you work through the course.
Alright, at this point let's actually run
this program to see what it does so
I'm going to press the f5 key remembering
that I could also come up here to the
run menu and click on run module
chose to instead, so I'm going to click
on f5 or press f5 so what's
actually happening now is that in real
time the Python program is actually
downloading the current exchange rates
for three currencies and it's been
produced a chart as you can see there
for the last 12 months for those
countries so depending on when you run
this, you'll find that the dates will be
the last 12 months you can see right up
here - August 2017 and that's the
current month, there's basically showing
the Australian dollars to Great Britain
pound and the Euro against the US dollar
and again the program displays the data
for the last twelve months, so you get different
follows along the x-axis. Now I don't
know about you but I think that's pretty
impressive for any 95 lines of code when
you consider include it includes the
code to download the relevant rates it
actually charts the results for us
automatically and you saw that it was
pretty fast to boot.
So I'll just close that down again,
so again I'm not going to explain how it
works at the moment because it uses a
lot of Python features everything it
does will be explained in the course
so it all makes sense as you work
through these videos. Alright, so that's
the brief of idle. In the next video
what we're going to do is install and
configure another IDE IntelliJ IDEA,
and we'll also talk about pycharm instead
which looks exactly the same as IDEA but
only supports python programming, as I
said though if you're already using an
IDE in it supports Python and you can
continue to use that instead for this
course, your screens will obviously look
different to the videos but the code
itself will be exactly the same.
Alright, we'll finish the video here and
I'll see you in the next one.